Title: Kistune Folktales
layout: about
permalink: /folktales.md

The Book of Japanese Folklore: An Encyclopedia of the Spirits, Monsters, and Yokai of Japanese Myth

AKA: Bake Kitsune, changing fox; Yako, field fox; Yoko, bewitching or calamitous fox; Kyubi no Kitsune, nine-tailed fox

"Once upon a time, a powerful fox spirit possessed courtesans in both China and India, then finally, during the Heian era (C.E. 794-1185), arrived (pg 108) for the first time on Japanese soil in the form of Tamamo no Mae. Tamamo no Mae wasn’t just extremely beautiful, she was also extremely intelligent. It was said there was no question she could not answer. She was also the favorite courtesan of Emperor Toba (1103-1156).
One day, out of the blue, the emperor fell deathly ill, and his mother blamed Tamamo no Mae. She called in an onmyoji (a powerful mystic) named Abe no Yasuchika (one of the famed Abe line - see Abe no Seimei entry). He came to the conclusion that Tamamo no Mae was possessed by a wicked nine-tailed fox spirit, and he chased her from the household.
At this point, stories differ. Certain accounts describe Tamamo no Mae transforming herself into a sizable stone, while others say she hid inside the stone as a kitsune spirit. Alternatively, one version says she was killed, and the arrow used to hunt her down was a holy “Whistling Arrow.” This specially carved arrow was believed to possess the ability to confine the nine-tailed fox’s malevolent spirit within the rock for all time.
Still another legend says an army shot her with regular arrows, piercing her neck and flank, then a warrior arrived to finish her off with his sword. It was while dying or after her death that she changed into the stone, becoming trapped.
However it came about, whether due to the fox spirit or the fox itself, an association was forged with a large rock called the Sessho-seki, translated as the “Life-Taking” or “Killing Stone.” This stone is still located in a park north of Tokyo. Legend had it that any person or any animal that ventured too close to the stone ended up dead. But at least she was imprisoned there." 

Folk Legends from Tono

“This is an animal-human love story from a town over on the coast. A young man from the hamlet of Ando went into town on business one evening and came across an old woman standing alone at the approach to the Otsuchi River bridge. She said “I am very sorry to bother you, but I have a request to make for my daughter who is sick. Could you please buy a certain medicine at the drugstore in town?” He thought she was probably just a beggar from somewhere. Even though he didn’t recognize the old woman, he willingly agreed to do it.
The old woman was very happy when he purchased the medicine and brought it to her on the bridge. She said, “My home is nearby. Why don’t you drop in?” Wondering what kind of dwelling it might be and curious to see it, he went with her. They entered a fairly large room through an opening in the rocks. As modest as it was, it was neat, with straw mats on the floor and furniture. The daughter who was supposedly sick was sleeping in a corner of the room. When the young man entered, she woke up slowly and greeted him. She was indescribably delicate. Her skin was pale and her eyes were bright. She was a beautiful small woman. Entertained that night, he enjoyed himself and went home. After that, as hard as he might try, he could not forget the girl. He went to see her every evening.
As their love deepened, he became weak and sickly. His friends noticed this and asked him about it. He told how he had become friendly with a beggar girl. Once they found out about the girl, they said they would do what they could for him and asked him to take them to see her. The young man had no choice but to take two or three friends to the rock cave. The mother and daughter were troubled by this, but even so, they welcomed them, serving tea and cakes. One friend, who thought there was something unusual about the home, secretly put a cake in his pocket to examine later. It turned out to be a perfectly normal cake. 
The next night, when the young man went to see the girl, she looked at him and explained her true identity. She said, “We are not really humans. We are foxes that once lived inside the Myojin fox shrine. My father was killed by someone years ago, and we have been living together like this since then.” With tears in her eyes, she said, “Hearing this, you are no doubt upset.” Nevertheless, the man thought that even if she was not a human being, he would not give up. She said that since her health was failing and he would no doubt have some bitter memories, it was better for them to part ways. She pushed the young man out of the room. After that, he could not forget her. He went back to the rocky area a number of times but couldn’t find the entrance to their room. It is said that the daughter probably died and the young man grieved. The person who told this story said it happened around 1915. He was an ex-soldier who visited Tono frequently.”

"In Muika-machi there was a male named Usuke Kappa. Because he was better than others at doing things in the river, he was given the nickname Kappa, which compared him to the legendary kappa water spirit. One summer evening when he went fishing at the base of Mt. Atago, he caught a considerable number of fish. It was very hot, and he didn’t want the fish to spoil. So he grilled them on a fire while he continued fishing. Suddenly, a woman with an open umbrella came out of the river. Usuke saw this and laughed with scorn. “Are you a fox trying to trick me?” He threw a stone at her, and she disappeared. Then, after a bit, a man appeared on the bank of the river and began cutting the grass. “Trying to trick me again, are you?” He threw a rock at the man, and he also disappeared. Feeling good, he laughed. 
Then, in the distance across the river, something lit up. He watched as a large number of paper lanterns were moving to and fro in a line. “Ha, ha,” he thought. “Now the fox has gone over there with the intention of doing something stupid.” But it was strange, and he thought it might be the celebration of a fox taking a wife. Then he realized his attention had drifted, and he turned to look at the fish on the fire. They had all been taken, not one remaining. He often told people later that he had been tricked on the third try by the fox." 
